Garuda's links to Vishnu – the Hindu god who fights injustice and destroys evil in his various avatars to preserve dharma – have made him an iconic symbol of kings' duty and power, an insignia of royalty or dharma. His eagle-like form is shown either alone or with Vishnu, signifying divine approval of the power of the state.[15] He is found on the faces of many early Hindu kingdom coins with this symbolism, either as a single-headed bird or a three-headed bird that watches all sides.[30]

Throughout the Mahabharata, Garuda is invoked as a symbol of impetuous violent force, speed, and martial prowess. Powerful warriors advancing rapidly on doomed foes are likened to Garuda swooping down on a serpent. Defeated warriors are like snakes beaten down by Garuda. The Mahabharata character Drona uses a military formation named after Garuda. Krishna carries the image of Garuda on his banner.[31]

Temples
[icon]	
This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (August 2024)
Though Garuda stautues and iconography can be seen in many Vishnu temples, there are very few temples dedicated to Garuda as a deity in India.

Vellamassery Garuda Temple, Triprangode, Tirur, Malappuram, Kerala
A 1800 year old ancient kavu dedicated to Garuda, it is famous in the state for the alleviation of 'sarpa dosham'. Nearby the main temple is a rare subsidiary shrine dedicated to the Kurma avatar of Lord Vishnu.

Chemmanadu Sri Krishna Garuda Mahavishnu Temple, Tiruvaniyoor, Ernakulam, Kerala
This temple was believed to have been constructed after Garuda himself manifested in eagle form in front of the devotees during the consecration ceremony. Lord Vishnu is present in his Mohini swaroopam in this temple, adding to its rarity.

Garuda Swamy Temple, Koladevi, Mulbagal, Kolar, Karnataka
Buddhism

Garuda vanquishing the Naga clan, a Gandhara artwork, second century CE.
Garuda, also referred to as Garula, are golden-winged birds in Buddhist texts. Under the Buddhist concept of saṃsāra, they are one of the Aṣṭagatyaḥ, the eight classes of inhuman beings. In Buddhist art, they are shown as sitting and listening to the sermons of the Buddha.[1] They are enemies of the Nāgas (snakes) and are sometimes depicted with a serpent held between their claws. Like the Hindu art, both zoomorphic (giant eagle-like bird) and partially anthropomorphic (part bird, part human) iconography is common across Buddhist traditions.[1]


Garuda (Khmer: គ្រុឌ, Krŭd) in Koh Ker style. Made of sandstone, this statue is from the first half of tenth century, (Angkor period). On display at the National Museum of Cambodia.
In Buddhism, the Garuda (Sanskrit; Pāli: garuḷā) are enormous predatory birds with a wingspan of 330 yojanas.[1] They are described as beings with intelligence and social organisation. They are also sometimes known as suparṇa (Sanskrit; Pāli: supaṇṇa), meaning "well-winged, having good wings". Like the Nāgas, they combine the characteristics of animals and divine beings, and may be considered to be among the lowest of the devas.[1] The Garudas have kings and cities, and at least some of them have the magical power of changing into human form when they wish to have dealings with people. On some occasions Garuda kings have had romances with human women in this form. Their dwellings are in groves of the simbalī, or silk-cotton tree.

Jataka stories describe them to be residents of Nagadipa or Seruma.[1]

The Garuda are enemies to the nāga, a race of intelligent serpent- or dragon-like beings, whom they hunt. The Garudas at one time caught the nāgas by seizing them by their heads; but the nāgas learned that by swallowing large stones, they could make themselves too heavy to be carried by the Garudas, wearing them out and killing them from exhaustion. This secret was divulged to one of the Garudas by the ascetic Karambiya, who taught him how to seize a nāga by the tail and force him to vomit up his stone (Pandara Jātaka, J.518).

The Garudas were among the beings appointed by Śakra to guard Mount Sumeru and the Trāyastriṃśa heaven from the attacks of the asuras.


13th century Cham sculpture depicts Garuda devouring a nāga serpent.
In the Maha-samaya Sutta (Digha Nikaya 20), the Buddha is shown making temporary peace between the Nagas and the Garudas.

In the Qing dynasty fiction The Story of Yue Fei (1684), Garuda sits at the head of the Buddha's throne. But when a celestial bat (an embodiment of the Aquarius constellation) flatulates during the Buddha's expounding of the Lotus Sutra, Garuda kills her and is exiled from paradise. He is later reborn as Song dynasty General Yue Fei. The bat is reborn as Lady Wang, wife of the traitor Prime Minister Qin Hui, and is instrumental in formulating the "Eastern Window" plot that leads to Yue's eventual political execution.[32] The Story of Yue Fei plays on the legendary animosity between Garuda and the Nagas when the celestial bird-born Yue Fei defeats a magic serpent who transforms into the unearthly spear he uses throughout his military career.[33] Literary critic C. T. Hsia explains the reason why Qian Cai, the book's author, linked Yue with Garuda is because of the homology in their Chinese names. Yue Fei's courtesy name is Pengju (鵬舉).[34] A Peng (鵬) is a giant mythological bird likened to the Middle Eastern roc.[35] Garuda's Chinese name is Great Peng, the Golden-Winged Illumination King (大鵬金翅明王).[34]

Jainism
[icon]	
This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (January 2018)
The Garuda is a yaksha or guardian for Shantinatha in Jain iconography and mythology.[5][6] Jain iconography shows Garuda as a human figure with wings and a strand-circle.[36]

As a cultural and national symbol

Garuda according to Ida Made Tlaga, a 19th-century Balinese artist.
In India and the rest of Southeast Asia the eagle symbolism is represented by Garuda, a large bird with eagle-like features that appears in both Hindu and Buddhist epic as the vahana (vehicle) of the god Vishnu. Garuda became the national emblem of Thailand and Indonesia; Thailand's Garuda is rendered in a more traditional anthropomorphic style, while that of Indonesia is rendered in heraldic style with traits similar to the real Javan hawk-eagle.

Cambodia

Garuda guardian sculptures (two on right side), Banteay Srei temple, Cambodia.
The word Garuda (Khmer: គ្រុឌ – " Krud ") is literally derived from Sanskrit.[37]

In Cambodia, Khmer architects have used the Garuda sculptures as the exquisite ornate to equip on temples, Viharas of wat and many elite houses since ancient time, especially from Khmer empire era until nowadays.
Garuda is also mentioned in many legendary tales as the vehicle of Vishnu and its main rival is Naga.
China
In China, Garuda (Chinese: 迦楼羅 Jiālóuluó) is considered one of the Eight Legions of Devas and Nāgas. Another Chinese name for Garuda is Great Peng, the Golden-Winged Illumination King (大鵬金翅明王)
In some temples in the Central Plains, Garuda is also considered to be a manifestation of Avalokitesvara, the Bodhisattva Guanyin.
India

Garuda emblem of the Gupta Empire.
India primarily uses Garuda as a martial motif:

Royal insignia (Garudadhvaja) of the Gupta Empire.
Garud Commando Force is a special forces unit of the Indian Air Force, specialising in operations deep behind enemy lines.[38]
Brigade of the Guards of the Indian Army uses Garuda as their symbol
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) uses Garuda as their logo[39]
Elite bodyguards of the medieval Hoysala kings were called Garudas
Kerala and Andhra Pradesh state road transport corporations use Garuda as the name for a/c mofussil buses
Garuda rock, a rocky cliff in Tirumala in Andhra Pradesh
The insignia of the 13th century Aragalur chief, Magadesan, included Rishabha the sacred bull and the Garud
Indian Hindi-language TV serial Dharm Yoddha Garud, based on the life of Garuda[40]
As an art form

Garudan Thookam, a temple dance primarily found in Central Kerala districts, where dancers dress as Garuda, and dance in praise of Goddess Kali.
Indonesia
See also: Javan hawk-eagle and Brahminy kite

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Garuda in Indonesia.

Balinese dancers including a man dressed as Garuda (1935).

The national emblem of Indonesia, which uses a Garuda.
Indonesia uses the Garuda in a form called the Garuda Pancasila as its national symbol. The Garuda Pancasila is coloured black or gilded, symbolising both the greatness of the nation and the elang Jawa (Javan hawk-eagle Nisaetus bartelsi). The black color represents nature. There are 17 feathers on each wing, 8 on the lower tail, 19 on the upper tail and 45 on the neck, which together make up the date 17 August 1945, when Indonesia proclaimed its independence. The shield it carries bears the motto Panca Sila, which symbolises self-defense and protection in struggle.[13]

Garuda Indonesia - national airline of Indonesia
Garuda Contingent - peacekeeping force of the Indonesian National Armed Forces
Airlangga University, one of the oldest and leading university in Indonesia uses Garuda on its emblem. The emblem, containing a Garuda in a blue and yellow circle, is called "Garudamukha", and depicts Garuda as the bearer of knowledge, carrying a jug of Amrita, the water of eternity, symbolising eternal knowledge.
In Bali and Java, the Garuda has become a cultural symbol. The wooden statue and mask of Garuda is a popular feature in artworks and souvenirs.[citation needed]
The tallest Garuda statue, made of copper and brass standing 75 metres (246.1 ft) tall (or 122 metres tall including the pedestal), is located in Garuda Wisnu Kencana complex in Bali.[41]
The stylised brush stroke that resembles Garuda appears in the logo of 2011 Southeast Asian Games, held in Palembang and Jakarta, Indonesia.
The stylised curves that took the form of Garuda Pancasila appears in the logo of Wonderful Indonesia tourism campaign.
Japan

Wingless statue of Garuda or Karura in Kofukuji Temple, Nara, Japan, eighth century.
The Karura (迦楼羅) is a divine creature with human torso and birdlike head in Japanese Hindu-Buddhist epics.[42]

Karura (Garuda) as an avatar of the goddess Kannon, fifteenth century.
The name is a transliteration of Garuda (Sanskrit: Garuḍa गरुड; Pāli: Garuḷa) a race of enormously gigantic birds in Hinduism, upon which the Japanese Buddhist version is based. The same creature may go by the name of konjichō (金翅鳥, lit. "gold-winged bird", Skr. suparṇa).
Malaysia
In the northern Peninsular state of Kelantan, the Geroda (Jawi: ݢرودا‎) often appears in stories of Wayang Kulit Kelantan as well as becoming the main motif of Burung Petala Indera boat-chariot made for special royal processions in the early 20th century.[43]

Mongolia
The Garuda, known as Khangarid, is the symbol of the capital city of Mongolia, Ulaanbaatar.[44] According to popular Mongolian belief, Khangarid is the mountain spirit of the Bogd Khan Uul range who became a follower of Buddhist faith. Today he is considered the guardian of that mountain range and a symbol of courage and honesty.
Khangarid (Хангарьд), a football (soccer) team in the Mongolia Premier League also named after Garuda.
State Garuda (Улсын Гарьд) is a title given to the debut runner up in wrestling tournament during Mongolian National Festival Naadam.
Myanmar
In Burmese epics, which was influenced by Hindu-Buddhist beliefs, Garuda is known as Galone, the nemesis of the Nāgas.[45]
The Garuda symbolises Sunday in the Burmese zodiac, which is based on the days of the week.
Nepal

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Garuda in Nepal.
Garuda is found in Nepalese traditions of Hinduism and Buddhism.
The first sounding rocket of Nepal is named Garuda.
The central bank, Nepal Rastra Bank uses Garuda in their official logo.
Ancient palaces in Kathmandu Valley use statue of Garuda at their gates.

Sun Dhoka Golden Gate with the Goddess Taleju Bhawani[46] and Garuda, leading to the Royal Palace, Durbar Square, UNESCO World Heritage Site, Bhaktapur, Nepal.
Philippines
in Luzon Mythology, Garuda or Galurâ (in Kapampangan) is a winged assistant of Apúng Sinukuan (Mariang Sinukuan), he is represented by a giant eagle and believed to be the bringer of storms.[47][48]
The Maranao people of southern Philippines believe in a race of creatures called garuda who dwell beneath the sea. These beings are winged, have big teeth, and huge talons that can carry six men. They look like eagles when flying in the sky but transform into humans when in their lairs.[49]
Artifacts from the Tabon Caves in the island of Palawan, is an image of Garuda, the bird who is the mount of Vishnu. The discovery of sophisticated Hindu imagery in gold.[50]
Suriname
In Suriname, there is a radio and TV station called Radio en Televisie Garuda, which broadcasts programming from Indonesia, particularly Java, aimed at the Javanese Surinamese population.[51]
Thailand

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Garuda in Thailand.

Garuda as the masthead of Thai royal barge.
Thailand uses the Garuda (Thai: ครุฑ, khrut) as its national symbol, known as the Phra Khrut Pha, meaning "Garuda, the vehicle (of Vishnu)," also used as the symbol of royalty.[52] It adorns the banknote of their currency - the Baht - as well.[53]

Almost all official documents issued by the government or monarchy bear the Garuda at the top, from royal commandments to land deeds and court orders. The Kingdom of Siam has had an image of Garuda in its coins since at least the Ayutthaya era.[53]
Statues and images of Garuda adorn many Buddhist temples in Thailand. It also has become a cultural symbol of Thailand.
The figure of Garuda is also installed as the figurehead or masthead of Thai royal barges.
United States

The Electronic Attack Squadron 134 (VAQ-134) of the United States Navy is named after and uses the Garuda Insignia.